WPILib Example Projects
=======================

.. warning:: While every attempt is made to keep WPILib examples functional, they are *not* intended to be used "as-is."  At the very least, robot-specific constants will need to be changed for the code to work on a user robot.  Many empirical constants have their values "faked" for demonstration purposes.  Users are strongly encouraged to write their own code (from scratch or from an existing template) rather than copy example code.

WPILib example projects demonstrate a large number of library features and use patterns.  Projects range from simple demonstrations of a single functionality to complete, competition-capable robot programs.

Basic Examples
--------------

These examples demonstrate basic/minimal robot functionality.  They are useful for beginning teams who are gaining initial familiarity with robot programming, but are highly limited in functionality.

* **ArcadeDrive** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/arcadedrive>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/ArcadeDrive>`__): Demonstrates a simple differential drive implementation using "arcade"-style controls through the ``DifferentialDrive`` class.
* **ArcadeDriveXboxController** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/arcadedrivexboxcontroller>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/ArcadeDriveXboxController>`__): Demonstrates the same functionality seen in the previous example, except using an ``XboxController`` instead of an ordinary joystick.
* **GettingStarted** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/gettingstarted>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/GettingStarted>`__): Demonstrates a simple autonomous routine that drives forwards for two seconds at half speed.
* **MecanumDrive** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/mecanumdrive>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/MecanumDrive>`__): Demonstrates a simple mecanum drive implementation using the ``MecanumDrive`` class.
* **MotorControl** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/motorcontrol>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/MotorControl>`__): Demonstrates how to control the output of a motor with a joystick.
* **MotorControlEncoder** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/motorcontrolencoder>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/MotorControlEncoder>`__): Identical to the above example, except with the addition of an encoder to read the motor position.
* **QuickVision** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/quickvision>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/QuickVision>`__): Demonstrates how to stream video from a USB camera to the dashboard.
* **Relay** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/relay>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/Relay>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``Relay`` class to control a relay output with a set of joystick buttons.
* **Solenoid** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/solenoid>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/Solenoid>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``Solenoid`` and ``DoubleSolenoid`` classes to control solenoid outputs with a set of joystick buttons.
* **TankDrive** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/tankdrive>`__): Demonstrates a simple differential drive implementation using "tank"-style controls through the ``DifferentialDrive`` class.
* **TankDriveXboxController** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/tankdrivexboxcontroller>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/TankDriveXboxController>`__): Demonstrates the same functionality seen in the previous example, except using an ``XboxController`` instead of an ordinary joystick.

Control Examples
----------------

These examples demonstrate WPILib implementations of common robot controls.  Sensors may be present, but are not the emphasized concept of these examples.

* **DifferentialDriveBot** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/differentialdrivebot>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/DifferentialDriveBot>`__): Demonstrates an advanced differential drive implementation, including encoder-and-gyro odometry through the ``DifferentialDriveOdometry`` class, and composition with PID velocity control through the ``DifferentialDriveKinematics`` and ``PIDController`` classes.
* **ElevatorProfiledPID** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/elevatorprofiledpid>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/ElevatorProfiledPID>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``ProfiledPIDController`` class to control the position of an elevator mechanism.
* **ElevatorTrapezoidProfile** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/elevatortrapezoidprofile>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/ElevatorTrapezoidProfile>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``TrapezoidProfile`` class in conjunction with a "smart motor controller" to control the position of an elevator mechanism.
* **GyroMecanum** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/gyromecanum>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/GyroMecanum>`__): Demonstrates field-oriented control of a mecanum robot through the ``MecanumDrive`` class in conjunction with a gyro.
* **MecanumBot** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/mecanumbot>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/MecanumBot>`__): Demonstrates an advanced mecanum drive implementation, including encoder-and-gyro odometry through the ``MecanumDriveOdometry`` class, and composition with PID velocity control through the ``MecanumDriveKinematics`` and ``PIDController`` classes.
* **PotentiometerPID** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/potentiometerpid>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/PotentiometerPID>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``PIDController`` class and a potentiometer to control the position of an elevator mechanism.
* **SwerveBot** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/swervebot>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/SwerveBot>`__): Demonstrates an advanced swerve drive implementation, including encoder-and-gyro odometry through the ``SwerveDriveOdometry`` class, and composition with PID position and velocity control through the ``SwerveDriveKinematics`` and ``PIDController`` classes.
* **UltrasonicPID** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/ultrasonicpid>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/UltrasonicPID>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``PIDController`` class in conjunction with an ultrasonic sensor to drive to a set distance from an object.

Sensor Examples
---------------

These examples demonstrate sensor reading and data processing using WPILib.  Mechanisms control may be present, but is not the emphasized concept of these examples.

* **AxisCameraSample** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/axiscamera>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/AxisCameraSample>`__): Demonstrates the use of OpenCV and an Axis Netcam to overlay a rectangle on a captured video feed and stream it to the dashboard.
* **CANPDP** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/canpdp>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/CANPDP>`__): Demonstrates obtaining sensor information from the PDP over CAN using the ``PowerDistributionPanel`` class.
* **DutyCycleEncoder** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/dutycycleencoder>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/DutyCycleEncoder>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``DutyCycleEncoder`` class to read values from a PWM-type absolute encoder.
* **DutyCycleInput** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/dutycycleinput>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/DutyCycleInput>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``DutyCycleInput`` class to read the frequency and fractional duty cycle of a PWM input.
* **Encoder** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/encoder>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/Encoder>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``Encoder`` class to read values from a quadrature encoder.
* **Gyro** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/gyro>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/Gyro>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``AnalogGyro`` class to measure robot heading and stabilize driving.
* **IntermediateVision** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/intermediatevision>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/IntermediateVision>`__): Demonstrates the use of OpenCV and a USB camera to overlay a rectangle on a captured video feed and stream it to the dashboard.
* **Ultrasonic** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/ultrasonic>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/Ultrasonic>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``Ultrasonic`` class to read data from an ultrasonic sensor in conjunction with the ``MedianFilter`` class to reduce signal noise.

Command-Based Examples
----------------------

These examples demonstrate the use of the :ref:`Command-Based framework <docs/software/commandbased/what-is-command-based:What Is "Command-Based" Programming?>`.

* **ArmBot** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/armbot>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/ArmBot>`__): Demonstrates the use of a ``ProfiledPIDSubsystem`` to control a robot arm.
* **ArmBotOffboard** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/armbotoffboard>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/ArmBotOffboard>`__): Demonstrates the use of a ``TrapezoidProfileSubsystem`` in conjunction with a "smart motor controller" to control a robot arm.
* **DriveDistanceOffboard** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/drivedistanceoffboard>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/DriveDistanceOffboard>`__): Demonstrates the use of a ``TrapezoidProfileCommand`` in conjunction with a "smart motor controller" to drive forward by a set distance with a trapezoidal motion profile.
* **FrisbeeBot** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/frisbeebot>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/Frisbeebot>`__): A complete set of robot code for a simple frisbee-shooting robot typical of the 2013 FRC game *Ultimate Ascent*.  Demonstrates simple PID control through the ``PIDSubystem`` class.
* **GearsBot** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/gearsbot>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/GearsBot>`__): A complete set of robot code for the WPI demonstration robot, GearsBot.
* **GyroDriveCommands** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/gyrodrivecommands>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/GyroDriveCommands>`__): Demonstrates the use of ``PIDCommand`` and ``ProfiledPIDCommand`` in conjunction with a gyro to turn a robot to face a specified heading and to stabilize heading while driving.
* **HatchbotInlined** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/hatchbotinlined>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/HatchbotInlined>`__): A complete set of robot code for a simple hatch-delivery bot typical of the 2017 FRC game *Steamworks*.  Commands are written in an "inline" style, in which explicit subclassing of ``Command`` is avoided.
* **HatchbotTraditional** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/hatchbottraditional>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/HatchbotTraditional>`__): A complete set of robot code for a simple hatch-delivery bot typical of the 2017 FRC game *Steamworks*.  Commands are written in a "traditional" style, in which subclasses of ``Command`` are written for each robot action.
* **MecanumControllerCommand** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/mecanumcontrollercommand>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/MecanumControllerCommand>`__): Demonstrates trajectory generation and following with a mecanum drive using the ``TrajectoryGenerator`` and ``MecanumControllerCommand`` classes.
* **RamseteCommand** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/ramsetecommand>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/RamseteCommand>`__): Demonstrates trajectory generation and following with a differential drive using the ``TrajectoryGenerator`` and ``RamseteCommand`` classes.  A matching step-by-step tutorial can be found :ref:`here <docs/software/examples-tutorials/trajectory-tutorial/index:Trajectory Tutorial>`.
* **SchedulerEventLogging** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/schedulereventlogging>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/SchedulerEventLogging>`__): Demonstrates the use of scheduler event actions to log dashboard event markers whenever a command starts, ends, or is interrupted.
* **SelectCommand** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/selectcommand>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/SelectCommand>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``SelectCommand`` class to run one of a selection of commands depending on a runtime-evaluated condition.
* **SwerveControllerCommand** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/swervecontrollercommand>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/SwerveControllerCommand>`__): Demonstrates trajectory generation and following with a swerve drive using the ``TrajectoryGenerator`` and ``SwerveControllerCommand`` classes.


Miscellaneous Examples
----------------------

These examples demonstrate miscellaneous WPILib functionality that does not fit into any of the above categories.

* **AddressableLED** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/addressableled>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/AddressableLED>`__): Demonstrates the use of the ``AddressableLED`` class to control RGB LEDs for robot decoration and/or driver feedback.
* **DMA** (`C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/DMA>`__): Demonstrates the use of DMA (Direct Memory Access) to read from sensors without using the RoboRIO's CPU (C++ only).
* **HIDRumble** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/hidrumble>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/HidRumble>`__): Demonstrates the use of the "rumble" functionality for tactile feedback on supported HIDs (such as XboxControllers).
* **PacGoat** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/pacgoat>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/PacGoat>`__): A full command-based robot project from FRC Team 190's 2014 robot.  Uses the deprecated version of the command framework; categorized as miscellaneous to avoid confusion.
* **Shuffleboard** (`Java <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibjExamples/src/main/java/edu/wpi/first/wpilibj/examples/shuffleboard>`__, `C++ <https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib/tree/master/wpilibcExamples/src/main/cpp/examples/ShuffleBoard>`__): Demonstrates configuring tab/widget layouts on the "Shuffleboard" dashboard from robot code through the ``Shuffleboard`` class's fluent builder API.
